Doc stakingv4 (#482)
multiversx/mx-docs: docs/validators/staking-v4.md

---
id: staking-v4
title: Staking v4
---

# **Introduction**

Staking and delegation should be developed as time goes on. No system has to stay the same. Our assumptions of how the
market works and reacts may change over time, the same way it may change with users and markets.
Right now we have around 400 validators (running one or multiple nodes). Some of them are staking providers, while
others are individuals running validators directly. Although most of the nodes have a nice topUp on the top of the base

> stake of 2.5k eGLD, others don't contribute to the network's security by adding more topUp.

Author: Fixed 2.5k -> 2.500

# **Problems with current implementation**

The problems with the current implementation:

- Limiting the number of nodes to 3200 and the additional queue list. New validators can join the network only if
  somebody leaves the system.
- Big providers are getting bigger, it does not help with decentralization. 31% of validators are controlled by Elrond
  Foundation. The top 11 staking agencies control 33%.
- Big providers are putting up nodes in the waiting list - as they have little to lose and when somebody gets out, they
  are the first to enter.

One of the first things we should eliminate is the additional queue and use the topUp value per node in order to decide
which are the best nodes and select those at the end of the epoch to become active. Doing that, we do not limit the
entry of new validators as currently an old validator must leave in order for a new one to enter. The market will decide
the actual price of the node, but it is not a hard auction, better say, it is a soft auction, where everybody paying the

> node price (2.5k eGLD) can register to the network, but the NODE becomes a validator only if it has enough TOPUP. The

Author: Fixed

shuffling from waiting list to eligible list will not be affected at all. We will only work on the selection of the
nodes from the auction list to waiting.

This is what we call _SOFT AUCTION_. Doing this we democratize, making the whole validator system as a free market.

The selection process of best X nodes from auction into “to be shuffled into waiting” list can be done in 2 ways.

**The first** and easy version it's a strict selection where we would sort all the nodes from the auction list based on
their topUp and select the first ones.

This is strict, as the VALIDATORS have to manage their number of nodes if their topUp is close to the border of
selection. This is because the topUp is computed as TotalStake/NumberOfNodes - 2,5k eGLD. So if a validator registers
more nodes, their topUp is smaller.
Example:

> - 10 nodes, 50k eGLD = 2.5k topUp per node

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 10 nodes, 50.000 eGLD = 2500 eGLD topUp per node
```

Author: Fixed

> - 20 nodes, 50k eGLD = 0 topUp

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 20 nodes, 50.000 eGLD = 0 eGLD topUp
```

is a need for constant supervision and action from SPs.

**Second version** is currently implemented and explained in the chapters below.

# **Current implementation**

:::note
Please note that the numbers below are indicative and only used to better exemplify the model.
:::

In the current implementation (staking 3.5), we have:

1. A capped number of 3200 **nodes in the network** out of which:
    - a global number of 1600 active/eligible validators, split in 400 nodes/shard
    - a global number of 1600 waiting validators to join the active list, split in 400 nodes/shard
2. An uncapped `FIFO` queue, in which **newly** staked nodes are placed and **waiting to take part in the network**.

:::important

Right now, the only way a queued node can take part in the network is if one of the existing nodes from the network is
either **unstaked** or **jailed**

:::

![](/validators/stakingV4/current-staking.png)

Nodes distribution is done in the following steps:

1. For each shard, randomly shuffle out 80 eligible validators, resulting in 320(80 validators/4 shards) shuffled out
   validators

> 2. Select those 320 shuffled out validators to be randomly, but evenly, distributed at the **end of each shard's waiting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Select those 320 shuffled-out validators to be randomly, but evenly, distributed at the **end of each shard's waiting
```

   list**

> 3. For each shard, replace the previously shuffled out with 80 waiting validators from the **top of each shard's waiting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. For each shard, replace the previously shuffled-out with 80 waiting validators from the **top of each shard's waiting
```

- 1 eligible: `node1`
- 2 waiting: `node2`, `node3`
- 1 auction: `node4`

Considering a minimum price of 2500 EGLD per staked node, `owner` should have a minimum base stake of 10.000 EGLD (4 *
2500 EGLD). Suppose that during the epoch he unstakes 4000 EGLD. This would result in a base stake of 6000 EGLD,
which is only enough to cover 2 staked nodes. Automatically, at the end of the epoch, w.r.t to the previous
order, `owner` will have `node4` and `node3` unstaked.

## Staking v4. Phase 2.

In the second step, all **shuffled out** nodes from **eligible list** will be sent to the **auction** list. Also,
waiting lists **will not be filled** by any shuffled out node.

Using the example above, this will result in each waiting list per shard to be resized from 400 nodes to 320 nodes.

![](/validators/stakingV4/stakingV4-phase2.png)

## Staking v4. Phase 3.

Starting with this epoch:

- Maximum number of nodes in the network will be changed from 3200 to 2880 (3200 - 320), consisting of:
    - a global number of 1600 active/eligible validators, split in 400 nodes/shard
    - a global number of 1320 waiting validators to join the active list, split in 320 nodes/shard

> - All **shuffled out** nodes from eligible list will be sent to auction list in order to take part in the auction
>   selection. The more topUp an owner has, the higher the chances of having his auction nodes selected will be.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- All **shuffled-out** nodes from the eligible list will be sent to the auction list to participate in the auction selection. The more topUp an owner has, the higher the chances of having his auction nodes selected will be.
```

- Based on the _soft auction selection_ (see next section), all **qualified** nodes from **auction** will be distributed

>   to waiting list (depending on the `available slots`). The other **unqualified** nodes will remain in auction and wait

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  to the waiting list (depending on the `available slots`). The other **unqualified** nodes will remain in the auction and wait
```

>   to be selected in the next epoch, if possible. The number of available slots is based on the number of shuffled out

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  to be selected in the next epoch, if possible. The number of available slots is based on the number of shuffled-out
```

  nodes and other nodes leaving the network (e.g.: `unstake/jail`). It guarantees that the waiting list is filled and
  the nodes configuration is maintained.

> - Distribution from `waiting` to `eligible` list will remain unchanged

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Distribution from the `waiting` to the `eligible` list will remain unchanged
```

![](/validators/stakingV4/stakingV4-phase3.png)

## Staking v4. Soft auction selection mechanism

Nodes from the auction list will be selected to be distributed in the waiting list based on the **soft auction**
mechanism.

> For each owner, based on his topUp, we compute how many validators he would be able to run by distributing his total

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each owner, based on his topUp, we compute how many validators he could run by distributing his total
```

topUp per fewer nodes(considering we would not select all of his auction nodes, but only a part of them). This mechanism

> ensures that for each owner we select as many nodes as possible, based on the **minimum required topUp** to fill the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ensures that for each owner, we choose as many nodes as possible, based on the **minimum required topUp** to fill the
```

`available slots`. This is a global selection, not per shard. We preselect the best global nodes at the end of epoch.

> Suppose we have the following auction list, and 3 available slots:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Suppose we have the following auction list and 3 available slots:
```

![](/validators/stakingV4/soft-auction1.png)

```
+--------+------------------+------------------+-------------------+--------------+-----------------+-------------------------+
| Owner  | Num staked nodes | Num active nodes | Num auction nodes | Total top up | Top up per node | Auction list nodes      |
+--------+------------------+------------------+-------------------+--------------+-----------------+-------------------------+
| owner1 | 3                | 2                | 1                 | 3666         | 1222            | pubKey1                 |
| owner2 | 3                | 1                | 2                 | 2555         | 851             | pubKey2, pubKey3        |
| owner3 | 2                | 1                | 1                 | 2444         | 1222            | pubKey4                 |
| owner4 | 4                | 1                | 3                 | 2666         | 666             | pubKey5, pubKe6, pubKe7 |
+--------+------------------+------------------+-------------------+--------------+-----------------+-------------------------+  
```

For the configuration above:

> - Minimum possible `topUp per node` = 666, considering `owner4` will have all of his **3 auction nodes selected**

Reviewer: Suggestion:
I would change numbers to get rid of the 666

Author: Fixed

+--------+------------------+----------------+--------------+-------------------+-----------------------------+------------------+---------------------------+-----------------------------+
```

- `owner1` has 1 auction node: `pubKey1` with qualified topUp per node = 1222 > 1216
- `owner2` has 2 auction nodes: `pubKey2`, `pubKey3` with a topUp per node = 851. By leaving one of his nodes in
  auction(`pubKey3`), while only selecting one of them(`pubKey2`), his topUp per node would be rebalanced to
  1277 (2555/2) > 1216
- `owner3` has 1 auction node: `pubKey4` with qualified topUp per node = 1222 > 1216
- `owner4` has 3 auction nodes: `pubKey5`, `pubKey6`, `pubKey7` with a topUp per node = 666. By leaving two of his
  nodes in auction(`pubKey6`, `pubKey7`), while only selecting one of them(`pubKey5`), his topUp per node would be
  rebalanced to 1333 (2666/2) > 1216

If we had increased the threshold above by one more step from `1216` to `1226`, we would only have two qualified
nodes: `pubKey2` and `pubKey5`, which is not enough to fill all slots.

:::note

> If an owner has multiple nodes in auction, but only a part of them are selected to be distributed in waiting list,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If an owner has multiple nodes in auction, but only a part of them are selected to be distributed in the waiting list,
```

> selection will be done by sorting the bls keys.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
selection will be made by sorting the bls keys.
```

:::

:::note

> Minimum required topUp per node, as well as real time auction list will be available in explorer at all times so that
> owners can decide what's the best strategy to maximize the number of auction nodes that will be selected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The minimum required topUp per node, as well as real time auction list, will be public in explorer at all times so that owners can decide the best strategy to maximize the number of auction nodes selected.
```

:::

> Finally, we sort all validators based on qualified topUp per node and select them based on available slots. In case two

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, we sort all validators based on qualified topUp per node and select them based on available slots. If two
```

> or more validators have the same topUp(e.g.: `pubKey1` and `pubKey4`), the selection will be random, but deterministic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or more validators have the same topUp(e.g.: `pubKey1` and `pubKey4`), the selection will be random but deterministic.
```

> Selection is done by a XOR between validators public keys and the current block's randomness. This ensures that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Selection is made by an XOR between validators' public keys and the current block's randomness. This guarantees that
```

> validators wouldn't be able to "mint" their bls keys in order to gain any selection advantage, since the randomness is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
validators will not be able to "mint" their bls keys to gain any selection advantage, since the randomness is
```

> only known at the selection time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
known only at the selection time.
```

```
 +--------+----------------+--------------------------+
 | Owner  | Registered key | Qualified TopUp per node |
 +--------+----------------+--------------------------+
 | owner4 | pubKey5        | 1333                     |
 | owner2 | pubKey2        | 1277                     |
 | owner1 | pubKey1        | 1222                     |
 +--------+----------------+--------------------------+
 | owner3 | pubKey4        | 1222                     |
 +--------+----------------+--------------------------+
```

Following our example above, we have two nodes with 1222 qualified top up per node:

- `owner1` with 1 bls key = `pubKey1`
- `owner3` with 1 bls key = `pubKey4`

> Suppose the result of the XOR operation between they bls keys and randomness is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Suppose the result of the XOR operation between their bls keys and randomness is:
```

- `XOR1` = `pubKey1` XOR `randomness` = `[143...]`
- `XOR2` = `pubKey4` XOR `randomness` = `[131...]`

> Since `XOR1` > `XOR2`, `pubKey1` will to be selected, while `pubKey4` remains in the auction list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since `XOR1` > `XOR2`, `pubKey1` will be selected, while `pubKey4` remains in the auction list.
```

# **FAQ**

## Will the APR decrease?

## How much topUp should I have as a validator?

## What happens if there are fewer nodes in auction than available slots?

> In this case all nodes will be selected, regardless of their topUP.

Author: Fixed

## One of my nodes was sent to auction during stakingV4 phase2. Will I loose rewards?

> If one of your nodes is shuffled out into auction list during phase2 it will enter in competition with the other

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If one of your nodes is shuffled-out into auction list during the phase2, it will compete with the other
```

> existing nodes. In case you have enough topUP, **nothing changes, no rewards will be lost**. For owners that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
existing nodes. If you have enough topUp, **nothing changes, and you won't lose any rewards**. THis change
```

> contribute to the ecosystem and keep a nice topUp, this change will not have any negative impact. Of course, in case you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
will not negatively impact owners that contribute to the ecosystem and keep a nice topUp. Of course, if you have low topUp, or close to zero, your nodes might be unqualified and remain on the auction list.
```

> have low topUp, or close to zero, your nodes might be unqualified and remain in auction list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

## Why downsize the waiting list?

Short answer: _to keep the APR unchanged_.

Before stakingV4, in case a node was shuffled out and moved to waiting list, it was guaranteed that it would only be
"idle"(not participating in consensus) for 5 epochs. During this time, the node would not gain any rewards.

During stakingV4 phase2, no node from waiting is moved to active. If we were to keep the same configuration, a shuffled

> out node from this phase would have to wait 6 epochs until eligible(if selected from auction) and therefore decreasing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
out node from this phase would have to wait for 6 epochs until eligible(if selected from auction) and therefore decreasing
```

---
id: staking-v4
title: Staking v4
---

# **Introduction**

Staking and delegation are processes that evolve over time. No system has to remain static. Our assumptions about how
the market works and reacts can change, just as user behavior and market dynamics may evolve. Currently, we have
approximately 400 validators, with some acting as staking providers and others as individual validator operators. While
most nodes have a comfortable top-up on the base stake of 2.5k eGLD, some do not contribute to the network's security by
adding more top-up.

# **Problems with the Current Implementation**

The issues with the current implementation include:

- Limiting the number of nodes to 3200, creating an additional queue. New validators can join the network only if
  someone leaves the system.

> - Concentration of power among large providers, hindering decentralization. MultiversX Foundation together with the top

Reviewer 2: I would rephrase it, say that the top X agencies control 33%.

Author: Right, good point, rephrased it

  11 staking agencies control 33%.

> - Large providers strategically place nodes in the waiting list, taking advantage of their position when a slot becomes

Reviewer 2: I think this could be deleted.

Author: Deleted it

:::

In the current implementation (staking 3.5), we have:

1. A capped number of 3200 **nodes in the network**, including:
    - 1600 active/eligible validators globally, split into 400 nodes per shard
    - 1600 waiting validators globally, split into 400 nodes per shard
2. An uncapped `FIFO` queue where newly staked nodes are placed and await participation in the network.

:::important

Currently, a queued node can participate in the network only if an existing node is either unstaked or jailed.

:::

![Current Staking](/validators/stakingV4/current-staking.png)

Nodes are distributed in the following steps:

1. Randomly shuffle out 80 eligible validators for each shard, resulting in 320 (80 validators per 4 shards)
   shuffled-out validators.
2. Select these 320 shuffled-out validators to be randomly but evenly distributed at the end of each shard's waiting
   list.
3. For each shard, replace the previously shuffled-out validators with 80 waiting validators from the top of each
   shard's waiting list.

In the current implementation, each node, regardless of its top-up, has equal chances of participating in the consensus.

> However, starting with staking phase 4, validators with higher staked top-up will have higher chances of participation.

Reviewer 2: actually those nodes with no topup, or small topup will have really small chance to enter into validation.

Author: Changed text to:

"Starting with staking phase 4, the probability of validators entering the validation process will be significantly influenced by the amount of their staked top-up. Validators with a higher staked top-up will have considerably greater chances of participation, while those with little or no top-up will find their chances of entering into validation markedly reduced."

# **Staking V4**

Staking phase 4 will unfold in three consecutive steps, each corresponding to a specific epoch.

> ## Staking v4. Phase 1.

Reviewer 2: we named staking Phase 4. so I would change the "Phase" from this. It sounds band staking phase 4 phase 1. Just put step 1.

Author: Right, renamed everywhere to step

```

- `owner1` possesses one auction node, `pubKey1`, with a qualified topUp per node of 1223, surpassing the threshold of
    1216.
- `owner2` holds two auction nodes, `pubKey2` and `pubKey3`, with a topUp per node of 851. By leaving one
  node (`pubKey3`) in the auction while selecting only one (`pubKey2`), the topUp per node is rebalanced to 1277 (
  2555/2), exceeding the minimum threshold of 1216.
- `owner3` has one auction node, `pubKey4`, with a qualified topUp per node of 1223, surpassing the threshold of 1216.
- `owner4` possesses three auction nodes, `pubKey5`, `pubKey6`, and `pubKey7`, with a topUp per node of 667. By leaving
  two nodes (`pubKey6`, `pubKey7`) in the auction while selecting only one (`pubKey5`), the topUp per node is rebalanced
  to 1334 (2668/2), exceeding the minimum threshold of 1216.

If the threshold were increased by one more step from `1216` to `1226`, only two nodes, `pubKey2` and `pubKey5`, would
qualify, which is insufficient to fill all slots.

:::note

If an owner has multiple nodes in the auction, but only a portion is selected for distribution in the waiting list, the
selection will be based on sorting the BLS keys.

:::

:::note

> The minimum required topUp per node, along with the real-time auction list, will be accessible in the explorer at all

Reviewer 2: is accessible.

Author: Refactored here and in another place as well
